As sea levels rise, Rotterdam floats to the top as an example of how to live with water
When a big storm hits a coastal city like New York or New Orleans, it's often the storm surge that does the most damage — the rising water that comes with low atmospheric pressure. But when the next big one hits Rotterdam, the Maeslant storm surge barrier will be ready for it.

The Maeslant structure is the biggest mobile barrier in the world — picture a pair of steel lattices twice the size of the Eiffel Tower, lying down on either side of the channel connecting the Netherlands’ second-biggest city to the North Sea. The Dutch built the massive gate in the 1990s to protect Rotterdam from a storm surge of up to three meters.That was back when much of the world still saw climate change and sea-level rise as distant threats. But not the Dutch.“We were already busy with the climate change before it was worldwide,” says Peter Persoon, an engineer turned tour guide at the barrier. “What we are busy with is the future. What are the circumstances in 2100? That’s why we are preparing our country.”

It’s also why cities around the world are turning to the Dutch for their expertise in living with water, honed over generations.

Persoon says the Maeslant barrier should protect Rotterdam from everything up to a one-in-10,000-year storm. Compare that to the levees protecting New Orleans before Hurricane Katrina, which were built for a one-in-100-year event. It cost more than $500 million — a big sum but just a small slice of what the country is investing to fight the effects of climate change.

And Persoon says it’s money well-spent. The Maeslant barrier has already had to be closed once, in 2007. And sea-level rise projections suggest it could be closing a lot more often in the coming decades.

“What we tell the people here in the Netherlands is, if the country is flooded the damage will be at least 700 billion euros,” Persoon says. “If you instead spend every year one billion euros, you spread the bill over 700 years. That’s, I think, the Dutch way.”

That “Dutch way” goes back hundreds of years. Most of the country’s people live less than a meter above sea level, or even below it. The modern Dutch government actually grew out of medieval “water boards” that managed the windmills and canals that have long helped keep the low-lying country dry.

But in the 21st century it’s a challenge on a whole different scale. And you can see the Dutch taking it on just about wherever you look.

The €725 million storm protection barriers around the expanded port of Rotterdam includes 20,000 concrete cubes, a slope of stones and constructed dunes known as a “soft seawall." Credit:
Pieter Edelman/Flickr Creative Commons
About 30 miles west of downtown Rotterdam, where the Rhine River empties into The North Sea, more than 10,000 acres of filled-in land make up the biggest port in Europe. This area, called the Maasvlakte, was built in the 1960s and ‘70s. Today it's undergoing a $3 billion expansion, and the Dutch are making sure to protect their investment with a massive new seawall.

“We studied the worst case scenario,” in designing the seawall, says port spokesman Maarten van Oosten.

ESSAY

Marco Werman: It's about the flood, not the storm
Arts, Culture