Global Cooling? No Day Above 83 in KC Forecast Through June 9
Kansas City may be on the verge of setting a new cooling record. This record may raise eyebrows even among those weary of seeing one cooling record after another set during this, the global warming era.

In 1999, the first 90-degree day did not occur until June 5, a new “late” record. The average is May 27. In 2007, however, without any fanfare, June 5 came and went without a 90-degree day. For the next ten days, the media chose not to notice as record fell after record. On June 15, again without any notice, the high temperature topped out at 90 degrees, a new “late” record by ten full days.

Sort of like Joe DiMaggio, who went on a 16-game hitting streak after his 56-game streak ended, KC 2007 went on a new cool streak. After June 15, no day reached 90 degrees for another ten days, and no day exceeded 90 until well into July, a month in which the average daily high is 90. Almost no one in Kansas City was aware of this. The media chose not to report it. The story did not fit the preferred narrative.

Although 2016 also broke the old June 5 record, this year’s weather is even more impressively cool. According to weather.com, no day is predicted to top 83 through June 9. The average June high is 85, although admittedly lower in the first half of the month. This forecast could all change of course. As we are told time and again, “Climate change is real.”

The Washington Post reminded us of this on March 20 of this year in a major scare article headlined, “First day of spring, or summer? Record heat torches Southwest and Plains.” The article was accompanied by maps so aflame with blazing browns and reds that it had to have cost at least a few schoolchildren a good night’s sleep. In one of its rare acknowledgments of Kansas City, the Post noted the city recorded a high of 87, a new record high for that date. This was a narrative the major media could enjoy.

Old-timers are unfazed by global warming or cooling. They endured the summers of 1934-1936, the hottest in modern American history, without air conditioning. Ocean hot spots were to blame, not carbon dioxide. This weather helped cause massive dust storms that travelled as far as New York, Boston and beyond.

So what does this June cooling portend? Check your Farmer’s Almanac. We have no more idea than does Al Gore.