Center for Biological Diversity
The Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) is a wealthy and radical anti-development activist and litigation organization that specializes in manipulating the Endangered Species Act to prevent resource production and human activity. Its activities have involved breaking the law – including a shoplifting conviction for its founder – and framing innocent people to ruin their lives and livelihoods.

Despite its hard-left anti-corporate stance, it has collected large donations from Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, Microsoft and the ExxonMobil Foundation. It also enjoys support from some of the largest left-wing foundations in America, including the Tides Foundation, The New York Times Company Foundation, Rockefeller Family Fund, and Pew Charitable Trusts. The Center for Biological Diversity has incorporated several times in three different states, has changed its name and address and merged into a holding company, which is not only puzzling, but also makes tracking its activities, officers, and funding difficult.

In 2002, CBD was caught inserting falsified evidence of range damage into the federal grazing permit file of an Arizona ranching company the group had targeted for destruction. The wronged rancher took CBD to court in 2005, and a guilty verdict at trial required CBD to pay $600,000 in damages.

Ripe for Abuse: Endangered Species Act
The Center’s mission, as stated on its 2014 IRS Form 990, is “to secure a future for all species, great and small, hovering on the brink of extinction. We do so through science, law and creative media, with a focus on protecting the lands, waters and climate that species needs to survive.”

CBD focuses on lands and waters because its major weapon, the Endangered Species Act (ESA), is mostly about habitat – lands and waters – not the officially listed plants and animals that occupy the lands and waters. “Habitat” covers all lands and waters, government owned and private property. “Critical Habitat” is a designation that empowers agencies to impose severe measures to enforce the Act. Critical habitat is defined as specific areas:

within the geographical area occupied by the species at the time of listing, if they contain physical or biological features essential to conservation, and those features may require special management considerations or protection; and
outside the geographical area occupied by the species if the agency determines that the area itself is essential for conservation.
Federal protection measures are notoriously unsuccessful: The number of saved species “delisted” from endangerment is much smaller than expected – only 1.3 percent of the 2,105 species on the list as of 2013. Federal agencies counter that only 0.5 percent of species placed on the list have become extinct, which could also show that the listed species was not endangered in the first place. Federal agencies also have no incentive to delist species because delisting reduces their workload, their appropriations, and their power.

Endangered species penalties are often draconian. In the extreme, if you dig a flower bed in your own backyard and harm the habitat of an endangered spider or daisy, under ESA’s Section 11(b), you could get a year in federal prison and a $50,000 fine for each violation. Many such absurd cases are on record.

Since the 1978 U.S. Supreme Court decision in the snail darter case stopped Tennessee’s $100 million Tellico Dam in mid-construction, the Endangered Species Act has trumped economics, property rights, and all else. The high court fashioned a virtually omnipotent bludgeon in a single sentence of its ruling: “Congress intended endangered species to be afforded the highest of priorities.” In effect, the Supreme Court’s ESA ruling meant productive people would be afforded the lowest of priorities. Congress had to pass a special exemption for the dam to be completed, and project agencies can now seek an exemption from certain sections of the law from a special committee.

The CBD has learned to exploit the language of the ESA, and subsequent court rulings, to the point of abuse. It searches for endangered species, petitions to have them listed under the ESA, and demands their “critical habitat” be shown as lines on a map of their making. This expensive and time-consuming tactic forces lands and waters that any species occupies – or even could occupy – to be “protected” by the government, stopping any human activity there. CBD also works to gain positions on federal advisory committees for themselves or their allies to further influence the agencies that control habitat.

The number of people CBD has put out of work – and the residents they have kept from something as environmentally benign as collecting firewood for winter survival – has been the subject of many media reports. Here are two: New York Times, “In New Mexico, an Order on Elusive Owl Leaves Residents Angry, and Cold“; Los Angeles Times, “Firewood Issue Fuels Battle in New Mexico Mountains : Forests: Villagers say suit limiting access to key heating source puts wildlife protection ahead of human needs.”

Background