Climate Action Network
The U.S. Climate Action Network is a left-wing climate alarmist coordination center in Washington, D.C.  USCAN is a key affiliate of the Climate Action Network-International (CAN-I), a worldwide climate alarmist complex based in Bonn, Germany and dating back to 1989. It now comprises over 900 climate activist groups in 100 countries. USCAN itself had 88 U.S. member groups as of 2015.  CAN is one of the three core coalitions of the US national climate change movement as ranked by “centrality scores” in a peer reviewed study.
Source: Changing Climate Politics: U.S. Policies and Civic Action (Page 160)

USCAN’s administrative structure resembles a phony shell group. It is directed by a 21-member board comprised entirely of officials from wealthy far-left Big Green groups including Greenpeace, Union of Concerned Scientists, Center for Biological Diversity, Sierra Club, and Natural Resources Defense Council. USCAN’s staff of six has unremarkable backgrounds except for the executive director, who came from eight years with the elite World Wide Fund for Nature.

USCAN and CAN-I operate full-time programs to influence global policy on climate change with alarmist views.  They have close ties with United Nations delegates and communicate privately with UN leadership, but are most active during the United Nations’ “Conference of the Parties,” or COP, and “PrepCons,” Preparatory Conferences ahead of the COP itself. At such times, the network concentrates on swaying the U.N. negotiators and the public to support their preferences for draconian climate change policy. Since CAN-I was founded in 1989, Network leaders have become most-favored persons with United Nations leaders. During COP and PrepCon meetings CAN activists send a daily lobbying newsletter, ECO, to all diplomatic delegates and the media with full access to U.N. facilities that are closed to all other NGOs.

Controversies
Climate Action Network showed its true colors at the 2015 Paris climate conference in confrontations with an international delegation of climate realists. CAN called for the U.N. to eject all skeptics from the Paris talks, but without result, since the skeptic groups had for years held proper credentials from ECOSOC, the Economic and Social Council, the U.N. status controller. Activists were furious that the Heartland Institute, an American libertarian group, showed a new documentary called “Climate Hustle” that debunks claims made by environmentalists sounding the alarm on global warming.

In a panic, CAN activists pasted more than 1,000 “Wanted” posters outside Paris luxury hotels, falsely accusing skeptics of “having ties to the fossil fuel industry”and calling them “climate change criminals.” CAN had to get the posters with the help of New York City-based global crowd broker Avaaz, which had organized hundreds of thousands of people worldwide to march in their home locations in favor of a strong climate agreement. Avaaz printed more than 1,000 wanted posters overnight and CAN activists posted them where they would catch the eyes of influential conference attendees. Avaaz volunteers also helped CAN by passing out flyers featuring the skeptic “criminal wanted” photos at metro stations near the conference.  Members of the climate realist delegation told of “unruly fanatics” from Climate Action Network blocking entrances, where the Paris Security Forces had to remove them.

New York Times ridicules “Wanted Posters” as a “Stunt”
The New York Times began its article with, “Besides their deadly serious purpose, the Paris climate talks are also an opportunity for elaborate displays of performance art,” and explained the “Wanted Poster” targets with this report:

Those who made the group’s list are:

Myron Ebell and Christopher C. Horner of the Competitive Enterprise Institute
Bjorn Lomborg, a Danish author who does not question the reality of climate change but doubts the urgency of the problem and the solutions put forward by activists
Marc Morano, a former Republican congressional aide who runs a website called Climate Depot and has criticized climate scientists for, as he says, putting activism ahead of science
Benjamin Sporton, an Australian who is the chief executive of the World Coal Association
 James M. Taylor, senior fellow at the climate-change denial lobby group Heartland Institute
 Fiona Wild, a chemist who is the vice president of BHP Billiton, a leading mining, metals and oil company based in Australia
All seven were asked by The New York Times to respond to the stunt and allegations; four responded to the emails.

Mr. Morano sent back a photograph of himself, looking mock-terrified, crouching next to one of the “Wanted” posters that had been posted in the Eighth Arrondissement.

“The posters are an exercise in silliness,” Mr. Morano said. “Climate skeptics are here promoting open debate and arguing to allow dissent. The idea that any alternative views amount to a ‘criminal’ perspective is obscene.”

Mr. Morano said he planned to go on as planned with the premiere of his new film, “Climate Hustle,” at 7:30 p.m. on Monday at the historic Cinéma du Panthéon.

Mr. Horner, the author of “Red Hot Lies: How Global Warming Alarmists Use Threats, Fraud, and Deception to Keep You Misinformed,” noted that he had proudly quoted Greenpeace calling him a “climate criminal” on the cover of that book, published in 2008.

“I’d say it’s getting a little long in the tooth,” Mr. Horner, who is known for filing voluminous Freedom of Information Act requests seeking information on climate scientists.

Mr. Taylor, of the Heartland Institute, said in an email: “It is a shame that people must experience such vitriol and harassment when they make scientific arguments supported by scientific data. If such attacks must be made, however, I am glad it was my face that appeared on their posters. I will always be proud to stand up for free and open discourse and ultimate truth.”

Climate Action Network  Wants UN to Force U.S. Under International Labor Union Control
Paris, December 7, 2015. International labor unions may be granted unprecedented authority to set and legally enforce domestic labor policy in the United States, activists participating in United Nations climate talks in Paris hinted Friday. The revelation was presented at a UN-sanctioned Climate Action Network panel discussion and press briefing as part of the United Nations Conference of the Parties (COP21) climate talks taking place in Paris.

Kelly Stone, a senior policy analyst at leftist activist group ActionAid, a coalition member of Climate Action Network, said language in any formal climate agreement emerging from the COP21 talks will include specific language regarding human rights. Stone said the main source of contention is whether such language will occur in preambles or in the legally enforceable “operative language” of a final climate agreement. Stone emphasized the position of participating activist groups that human rights language must be legally enforceable upon all nations and guaranteed in the operative language of an agreement.

Stone gave few specifics regarding the precise human rights to be protected and how they would be enforced. The closest she came to this was vaguely mentioning gender equality and a “just transition to quality jobs in the workforce.”

When questioned, Stone clouded the issue further with a long and undecipherable reply: “negotiators had developed a paragraph specifically protecting gender equality, indigenous peoples, food security, and the plight of people “displaced” by climate change and actions to address climate change. As an example of anticipated displacement, she mentioned coal industry workers who will lose their jobs due to restrictions on coal power. Stone said the language of a final climate agreement would defer the resolution of displaced workers to ‘the labor movement, because they are the experts on the topic.'”

Such an enforceable measure was not included in the final Treaty.

 

Money
Tax status: U.S. Climate Action Network, 501(c)(3). Based on the participation of 61 NGOs in the Network, U.S. Climate Action Network has an effective income of $1.454 billion, according to the research of Robert Brulle in Changing Climate Politics: U.S. Policies and Civic Action, p. 157. However, the accounting below includes only the money of the stand-alone organization.
USCAN’s financial assets were $1,025,222 in 2014.
USCAN’s total income in 2014 was $2.1 million.
USCAN’s investment portfolio income was $512 in 2014.
USCAN gave $941,000 in grants in 2014.
USCAN paid salaries of $669,162 in 2014.
USCAN paid executive director Peter Bahouth $147,805 in 2014.
USCAN spent $5,776 on direct lobbying in 2014.
USCAN spent $62,598 on direct lobbying 2010-2014.
Power
USCAN has no record of holding any seat on a Federal Advisory Committee.
USCAN has no record of submitting regulatory recommendations to any federal docket.
Network Interactions
Donor Network (2006-2014)
The U.S. Climate Action Network’s has received 236 grants from 54 foundations totaling $13,731,793 (2006-2014). Most donors are members of the Environmental Grantmakers Association, a planning and organizing cartel for Big Green foundations only. The top ten extreme climate agenda donors are:

SEA CHANGE FOUNDATION $3,650,000
THE ENERGY FOUNDATION $2,522,000
ROCKEFELLER BROTHERS FUND INC $675,000
TOWN CREEK FOUNDATION INC $610,000
BLUE MOON FUND INC $510,000
V KANN RASMUSSEN FOUNDATION $500,676
WESTWIND FOUNDATION $485,000
ROCKEFELLER FAMILY FUND INC $480,000
TIDES FOUNDATION $393,400
MERCK FAMILY FUND $375,000
Source: Foundation Search. Includes related network grant recipients.

Climate Action Network International
Climate Action Network International is not registered in the United States and is not recognized by the IRS as a tax-exempt organization. It is domiciled at Charles-de-Gaulle Strasse 5, 53113 Bonn, Germany. Its 2014 Annual Report contains a financial page showing $1,416,290 revenue in U.S. funds along with other standard entries and identifies ten donor groups without amounts.

Background