As Always Everywhere, ‘Green Energy’ Is Killing New York’s Economy
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo appears to loathe actual energy.  You know, oil, gas, coal, etc.  The sources of energy that actually produce energy – cheaply and efficiently.

And instead has an incredible affinity for fake energy.  You know – wind, solar, ethanol, etc.  The alleged “green energy” – which is neither green nor energy.  Alleged energy sources that are in many instances actually worse for the environment than real energy sources.  That can’t even exist without massive government cash infusions.  And that produce what little energy they do – in a woefully inefficient manner.

But when you fetishize a belief in the Greatest Scam on Earth – that would be global warming…ooops, I mean climate change – the real-fuel-loathing and the “green energy”-fake-fuel-black-hole almost always follow.



New York Governor Cuomo is rigidly holding to this foolish form.

You Won’t Believe How Badly Cuomo’s Anti-Pipeline Stance Is Crushing New York’s Economy: “The US Chamber of Commerce’s Institute for 21st Century Energy dug deeper into Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s anti-pipeline stance. They wanted to know exactly what the repercussions were for average New Yorkers, so that the governor can make a more educated decision the next time a gas pipeline proposal comes across his desk.  Gov. Cuomo has blocked two pipelines — last year, he blocked the Constitution pipeline and this month he blocked the Northern Access.”

Cuomo’s blocking real energy – costs mere citizens real coin:

“(The) study pointed out that there just aren’t enough pipelines, which has serious repercussions.  The numbers were pretty damning:

“… the Northeast (New England, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania) is paying more for natural gas, losing tens of thousands of jobs and emitting more greenhouse gases than necessary thanks to ‘self-imposed’ local ‘pipeline constraints.’

“The projected loss to the region by 2020 adds up to 78,400 jobs and nearly $7.6 billion in economic activity and ‘the displacement of $4.4 billion in labor income.’

“New York alone would see $1.6 billion less in state GDP and the loss of 17,400 jobs.

“Already, Northeasterners shell out 29 percent more for gas than the US average and 44 percent more for electricity. Industrial customers pay twice the national gas average — and 62 percent more for power.”

Get that?  New Yorkers are already down $1.6 billion in economic activity.  And nearly 20,000 (well-paying) gigs.  Plus they’re paying more and more (and more) for their energy.

But Cuomo’s just getting warmed up.  Besides doing his best to block real energy – Cuomo is dramatically ramping up the state’s foray into fake energy:

“Governor Andrew Cuomo announced a unilateral mass expansion of government…: ‘The state’s Public Service Commission (PSC) earlier Monday passed a new set of standards that by 2030 is supposed to ensure that half of New York’s energy needs are met by renewable methods, ranging from solar and wind, as well as hydro and nuclear power.’”

New York currently gets 11% of its energy from these sources – mostly from water, thanks to Niagara Falls and other massive running sources.  Which they have already maxed out.  To get to 50% in but fifteen years is…some serious wishful thinking.

And requires massive additional infusions of government coin.  Cuomo, of course, has that covered: “(T)he Public Service Commission also included a new (energy) tax worth $8 billion.”

Get that?  Cuomo having already killed roughly $2 billion in economic activity for his electorate – is now looking to bleed them for $8 billion more in new taxes.

And in yet another obnoxious wrinkle – that very real coin doesn’t even go to pay for fake energy.  It goes to a massive Cuomo crony: “(The tax) money will go to plant owner Exelon, a Chicago-based Fortune 100 company with annual revenues of over $34 billion.”

Because Exelon needs it way more than average New Yorkers.

New Yorkers – who are watching their governor kill actual energy sources with real, really positive economic impact.

New Yorkers – who are watching their governor instead take billions from them.  Allegedly in the name of ridiculous fake energy – but actually to be given to their governor’s political crony.

Were I a New Yorker – I would be more than a little upset.