Guess Where The Money Behind Al Gore’s Promotion Of Climate Hysterics Came From
If you think former Vice-President and current head of the Church of Climate Change, Al Gore, was helping to save the world out of the goodness of his heart with his own money, you are sadly mistaken. As leaked documents reveal, Gore was having his pockets filled by an outside source that had a specific interest in the climate hysterics being spread far and wide.

And that source was none other than leftist sugar daddy George Soros.

According to Daily Caller, documents published by DC Leaks show that Soros’ group Open Society Institute (OSI) threw $10 million at Al Gore in 2008 to push climate panic in order to help push policies surrounding the bad science.

“U.S. Programs Global Warming Grants U.S. Programs became engaged on the global warming issue about four years ago, at George Soros’s suggestion,” reads a leaked OSI memo.

“There has been a budget of $11 million for global warming grants in the U.S. Programs budget for the last several years,” the memo reads. “This budget item captures George Soros’s commitment of $10 million per year for three years to Al Gore’s Alliance for Climate Protection, which conducts public education on the climate issue in pursuit of creating political space for aggressive U.S. action in line with what scientists say is necessary to put our nation on a path to reducing its outsize carbon dioxide emissions.”

The OSI continued to gift Gore’s Alliance for Climate Protection with more donations, including $5 million in 2009.Carl Arbogast

But all of this money wasn’t just to kick the climate alarmism into high gear, it was also help generate a youth movement:

OSI didn’t only plan to fund Gore’s climate group to promote global warming policies in the U.S., OSI also planned on giving millions of dollars to spur the “youth climate movement.”

“This budget item also allows for the renewal of U.S. Programs’ long-standing support of the Energy Action Coalition, which is the lead organizer of the youth climate movement in the U.S., the memo reads.

The Daily Caller reported that OSI, now called the Open Society Foundation, has handed out over $13 billion over the past three decades, mostly to left-wing causes.